Kafka: Avoid High Resource Usage on Kafka Startup-2 Plan (#2069)
aiven/devportal: docs/products/kafka/howto/avoid-high-resource-usage-on-kafka-startup-plan.rst

> Avoid high resource usage on Kafka® ``Startup-2`` plan

Reviewer: Suggest changing the title to either of these options: 
 - Optimize Kafka® Startup-2 Plan for low resource usage
 - Optimizing Resource Usage for Kafka® Startup-2 Plan

======================================================

> The Kafka Startup-2 Plan has been optimized for lightweight operations, making it ideal for applications that handle fewer messages per second and don't demand high throughput. But sometimes, you might encounter an alert showing high resource usage. This alert is generally triggered when the Kafka broker memory drops too low and CPU idle time is less than 15%. Grasping why these alerts occur and how to handle them will aid in optimizing your Kafka usage and maintaining application performance.

Reviewer: recommend changing this line: 
Grasping why these alerts occur and how to handle them will aid in optimizing your Kafka usage and maintaining application performance. 

To this: 

Understanding the reasons behind these alerts and their mitigation ensures optimized Kafka usage and consistent application performance.

What triggers high resource usage?
----------------------------------

> 

Reviewer: Add before bullet list: 
There are a few things that can trigger high resource usage on the Kafka Startup-2 plan:

- **High Kafka Traffic:**

>   Heavy traffic due to too many producer/consumer requests can cause an overload, leading to high CPU usage and memory pressure on the Kafka broker. When a Kafka cluster is overloaded, it may struggle to correctly assign leadership for a partition. This can lead to potential service disruptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Heavy traffic due to too many producer/consumer requests can cause an overload, leading to increased CPU and memory usage on the Kafka broker. When a Kafka cluster is overloaded, it may struggle to correctly assign leadership for a partition, potentially causing service disruptions. 
```

- **Excessive Kafka Partitions:**
  Having too many Kafka partitions for the brokers to manage effectively can lead to increased memory usage and IO load.

- **Too many client connections:**

>   When there are too many client connections, the memory usage can dip significantly. When your service's memory is low, it starts to use swap space, adding to the IO load. Regular use of swap space indicates your system may not have enough resources for its workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When there are too many client connections, memory usage can dip significantly. When your service's memory is low, it starts to use swap space, adding to the IO load. Regular use of swap space indicates your system may not have enough resources for its workload.
```

Additional causes of high resource usage
----------------------------------------

- **Datadog Integration:**
  While Datadog provides valuable monitoring, its agent is IO-heavy. On a Startup-2 Plan not designed for high IO operations, Datadog can significantly increase the IO load. Moreover, Datadog load increases with the number of topic partitions in your Kafka service.

- **Karapace Integration:**
  Karapace provides a REST API for Kafka, but this can consume a substantial amount of memory and contribute to a high load when REST API is used in high demand.

> Suggestion to reduce high resource usage

Reviewer: Suggest changing this sub-heading to either: 
- Strategies to minimize resource usage
or
- How to reduce high resource usage (since the above section is a what, this can be a how)

----------------------------------------

- **Reduce Topic Partition Limit:**
  Decreasing the number of topic partitions reduces the load on the Kafka service.

- **Disable Datadog Integration:**
  If Datadog is sending too many metrics that impacts the service's reliability and prevents the backup of topic configurations. So the suggestion is to disable Datadog service integration.

- **Enable Quotas:**
  Quotas can manage the resources consumed by clients, preventing any single client from using too much of the broker's resources.

- **Limit the Number of Integrations:**
  For smaller plans like the Startup-2, consider limiting the number of integrations to manage resource consumption effectively.

- **Upgrade Your Plan:**
  If your application demands more resources, upgrading to a larger Kafka plan can ensure stable operation.

> Important note on enabling integrations
> ---------------------------------------
> 
> The Kafka Startup-2 plan operates on relatively small machines. Enabling integrations like Datadog or Karapace can significantly consume the system's resources. Be aware that this could impact the stability of your cluster. If you need more resources than the Startup-2 plan can offer, it might be time to consider upgrading to a larger plan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IIntegration advisory for Kafka Startup-2 plan
-----------------------------------------------

The Kafka Startup-2 plan runs on relatively small machines. Enabling integrations like Datadog or Karapace may consume more resources than this plan can handle, affecting your cluster's performance. If you notice any issues with your cluster or need more resources for your integrations, consider upgrading to a higher plan.
```
